---
title: Shri Gurubhyo Namah
layout: post
category: article
tags: teachers
---

The year was 1948. Wars had been fought and blood spilt. It is sometimes said that cryptologists save the country thousands of lives since they break the secrets of the opposition before they can affect the outcome of battles. One such cryptologist was Claude Shannon. Though he had founded the principles of digital circuit design eleven years before when he was twenty-one, he later became best known for another field of computing and mathematics. Many would remember a paper by the name “A Mathematical Theory of Communication” he released that year, and the impact it has had on our lives is enormous. Information theory is a branch of statistical analysis that deals with the intricacies of how information is transmitted, stored and processed. Some of you may have noticed the date upon which this piece was published and its relevance to the transmission of information. The importance of information theory to this piece, however, is something entirely different. Information entropy is a neat little concept that plays a vital role in linking statistical mechanics and thermodynamics. That role was explained to me by a professor who taught me in my third semester of undergrad. To me, this intersection of seemingly completely separate fields was magical: the interweaving of fundamentals laws of nature we often take for granted.

The second president of India was a philosopher and a dreamer. He defended Indian thought processes and rationales. He proved to the world that a dirt-poor former colony could produce brilliant thinkers. He chose to abandon the title bestowed upon him by colonial overlords to prove that validation need not come from the saahibs. Like Shannon, however, these things are not what he is most famous for. While he was president, some people who felt he had played an important role in their lives got together and asked him how they could honour him. **Doctor** Radhakrishnan asked his students to celebrate his birthday in a manner that is followed to this day in India.

To me, teaching is one of the most enchanting things one can do, if they do it right. In my life, I’ve had the privilege of being taught by some truly amazing people. So many times I have seen people who have given me way more than anyone could ever ask them to give. Preparing pages upon pages of notes for ungrateful students. Desperately running up and down flights of stairs to reach classrooms on time so they can complete voluminous portions in a satisfactory manner before exams. Carting around scale models to explain the smallest of theories in breathtaking detail. I’ve been told not to have any expectations for the teaching that professors are capable of in higher education. Between research, mentoring scholars, and family, how could they possibly have time to reveal the secrets of the universe to half-asleep idiots? I joined an engineering college with appropriately low expectations. In my second and third semesters, I met professors who organised lab visits, hounded students to make sure they were understanding lectures, and individually mailed those who missed classes. In my fourth and current semester, I have professors who tailor assignments based on the stream the student is from. Every human has twenty-four hours to spend in a day. Right?

What is it about teaching that compels people to do so much in exchange for so little? What compels people to teach in the first place? Why do we ask someone else to read a book and explain its contents to us, instead of reading it ourselves? Maybe it’s because humans at first relied on word of mouth to spread knowledge, which needs at least one teacher and one pupil to be involved. Maybe it’s the hope that there are people who are better suited to explaining things to us than others. Maybe there is a drive to see a sparkle in the eyes of those before you as they come to the same conclusion that you did some time in the past. Or maybe it’s the immense sense of satisfaction gained when someone comes and tells you that you changed their lives. Perhaps someone would be willing to teach the answers of these questions to me.

The single teacher who probably played the biggest role in my life would be Dr. Y.G. Parthasarathy. She created the school that I spent fifteen years of my life in. She may have only taught me personally a few times in my life, but her ideologies likely changed more about who I am than any other teacher I have had. When she passed away in 2019 I put up a message in condolence. I had people ask me what the words I posted meant. It was one of the first things I was taught to say in school, a three-word phrase meant to pay respect to they who teach. At the beginning of every class, we were expected to stand up and say these words to the teachers. “I salute all my teachers”. Perhaps it is fitting that one of my first attempts to write something of my own volition is titled with these very same words. Happy Teacher’s Day to all the teachers out there.